Tuberculosis is a contagious, infectious
disease caused by mycobacterium tuberculosis
that primarily affects the lungs but can
involve other organs.
For respiratory therapists, TB is not just
about infection.
It's about understanding transmission,
recognizing risk,
and managing both respiratory status and
infection control.
The disease spreads through airborne
droplet nuclei when an infected person coughs,
sneezes, or speaks.
Once inhaled, the bacteria reach the
alveoli where they trigger
an immune response.
In many patients, this leads to latent
tuberculosis,
where the bacteria are contained but not
eliminated.
These patients are asymptomatic and not
infectious.
However, if the immune system weakens,
latent TB can reactivate into active
disease.
Active tuberculosis is where RTs play a
critical role.
Patients may present with chronic cough,
hemoptysis,
fever, night sweats, weight loss,
and fatigue.
From a respiratory standpoint, you must
assess oxygenation,
work of breathing, breath sounds, and
overall clinical stability, but also
immediately think infection control.
One of the most important first steps is
airborne isolation.
This includes placing the patient in a
negative pressure room and ensuring proper use
of N95 respirators.
Missing this step is a major safety risk
for staff and other patients.
Diagnostics focus on confirming infection
and infectiousness.
Chest x-ray often shows upper-lobed
infiltrates or cavitation.
Sputum samples are essential for acid-fast
bacilli smear and culture.
A positive smear suggests the patient is
infectious.
Additional tests like nucleic acid
amplification help confirm the diagnosis more rapidly.
Treatment involves long-term multidrug
therapy, typically including isoniazid,
rifampin, pyrazinamide, and ethambutol.
Adherence is critical, which is why
directly observed therapy is
often used.
From an RT perspective, you may assist
with sputum induction,
monitor respiratory status, and support
airway clearance when needed.
Red flags include worsening hypoxemia,
extensive lung involvement,
massive hemoptysis, or signs of
respiratory failure.
In these cases, escalation may involve
oxygen therapy or even
ventilatory support, but always with
strict airborne precautions in place.
For board exams, remember this core
pattern.
Chronic symptoms plus weight loss and
night sweats should immediately raise suspicion for TB.
Always prioritize isolation first, then
diagnostics,
then treatment.
The key takeaway is this.
Tuberculosis is both a respiratory and
public health emergency.
As an RT, your role is to protect the
patient,
protect yourself, and break the chain of
transmission while supporting
respiratory function.